The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Text-Book of the History of Painting, by 
John C. Van Dyke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Text-Book of the History of Painting

Author: John C. Van Dyke

Release Date: July 23, 2006 [EBook #18900]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF PAINTING ***




Produced by Joseph R. Hauser, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










           [Illustration: VELASQUEZ. HEAD OF ÆSOP, MADRID.]


                             A TEXT-BOOK

                                OF THE

                         HISTORY OF PAINTING



                                  BY

                       JOHN C. VAN DYKE, L.H.D.
Page 1
   PROFESSOR OF THE HISTORY OF ART IN RUTGERS COLLEGE AND AUTHOR OF
        "ART FOR ART'S SAKE," "THE MEANING OF PICTURES," ETC.



                       LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
                   91 AND 93 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK
                     LONDON, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA
                                 1909



                         COPYRIGHT, 1894, BY
                       LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

       *       *       *       *       *




PREFACE.


The object of this series of text-books is to provide concise
teachable histories of art for class-room use in schools and colleges.
The limited time given to the study of art in the average educational
institution has not only dictated the condensed style of the volumes,
but has limited their scope of matter to the general features of art
history. Archæological discussions on special subjects and æsthetic
theories have been avoided. The main facts of history as settled by
the best authorities are given. If the reader choose to enter into
particulars the bibliography cited at the head of each chapter will be
found helpful. Illustrations have been introduced as sight-help to the
text, and, to avoid repetition, abbreviations have been used wherever
practicable. The enumeration of the principal extant works of an
artist, school, or period, and where they may be found, which follows
each chapter, may be serviceable not only as a summary of individual
or school achievement, but for reference by travelling students in
Europe.

This volume on painting, the first of the series, omits mention of
such work in Arabic, Indian, Chinese, and Persian art as may come
properly under the head of Ornament--a subject proposed for separate
treatment hereafter. In treating of individual painters it has been
thought best to give a short critical estimate of the man and his rank
among the painters of his time rather than the detailed facts of his
life. Students who wish accounts of the lives of the painters should
use Vasari, Larousse, and the _Encyclopædia Britannica_ in connection
with this text-book.
Page 2
Acknowledgments are made to the respective publishers of Woltmann and
Woermann's History of Painting, and the fine series of art histories
by Perrot and Chipiez, for permission to reproduce some few
illustrations from these publications.

JOHN C. VAN DYKE.

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I.

EGYPTIAN PAINTING

CHAPTER II.

CHALDÆO-ASSYRIAN, PERSIAN, PHOENICIAN, CYPRIOTE, AND ASIA MINOR PAINTING

CHAPTER III.

GREEK, ETRUSCAN, AND ROMAN PAINTING

CHAPTER IV.

ITALIAN PAINTING--EARLY CHRISTIAN AND MEDIÆVAL PERIOD, 200-1250

CHAPTER V.

ITALIAN PAINTING--GOTHIC PERIOD, 1250-1400

CHAPTER VI.

ITALIAN PAINTING--EARLY RENAISSANCE, 1400-1500

CHAPTER VII.

ITALIAN PAINTING--EARLY RENAISSANCE, 1400-1500, _Continued_

Page 3
CHAPTER VIII.

ITALIAN PAINTING--HIGH RENAISSANCE, 1500-1600

CHAPTER IX.

ITALIAN PAINTING--HIGH RENAISSANCE, 1500-1600, _Continued_

CHAPTER X.

ITALIAN PAINTING--HIGH RENAISSANCE, 1500-1600, _Continued_

CHAPTER XI.

ITALIAN PAINTING--THE DECADENCE AND MODERN WORK, 1600-1894

CHAPTER XII.

FRENCH PAINTING--SIXTEENTH, SEVENTEENTH, AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES

CHAPTER XIII.

FRENCH PAINTING--NINETEENTH CENTURY

CHAPTER XIV.

FRENCH PAINTING--NINETEENTH CENTURY, _Continued_

CHAPTER XV.

SPANISH PAINTING

CHAPTER XVI.

FLEMISH PAINTING

CHAPTER XVII.

DUTCH PAINTING

CHAPTER XVIII.

GERMAN PAINTING

CHAPTER XIX.

BRITISH PAINTING

CHAPTER XX.
Page 4
AMERICAN PAINTING

POSTSCRIPT

INDEX

       *       *       *       *       *




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


     Velasquez, Head of Æsop, Madrid           _Frontispiece_

1    Hunting in the Marshes, Tomb of Ti, Saccarah

2    Portrait of Queen Taia

3    Offerings to the Dead. Wall painting

4    Vignette on Papyrus

5    Enamelled Brick, Nimroud

6        "       "    Khorsabad

7    Wild Ass. Bas-relief

8    Lions Frieze, Susa

9    Painted Head from Edessa

10   Cypriote Vase Decoration

11   Attic Grave Painting

12   Muse of Cortona

13   Odyssey Landscape

14   Amphore, Lower Italy

15   Ritual Scene, Palatine Wall painting

16   Portrait, Fayoum, Graf Collection

17   Chamber in Catacombs, with wall decorations
Page 5
18   Catacomb Fresco, S. Cecilia

19   Christ as Good Shepherd, Ravenna mosaic

20   Christ and Saints, fresco, S. Generosa

21   Ezekiel before the Lord. MS. illumination

22   Giotto, Flight into Egypt, Arena Chap.

23   Orcagna, Paradise (detail), S. M. Novella

24   Lorenzetti, Peace (detail), Sienna

25   Fra Angelico, Angel, Uffizi

26   Fra Filippo, Madonna, Uffizi

27   Botticelli, Coronation of Madonna, Uffizi

28   Ghirlandajo, Visitation, Louvre

29   Francesca, Duke of Urbino, Uffizi

30   Signorelli, The Curse (detail), Orvieto

31   Perugino, Madonna, Saints, and Angels, Louvre

32   School of Francia, Madonna, Louvre

33   Mantegna, Gonzaga Family Group, Mantua

34   B. Vivarini, Madonna and Child, Turin

35   Giovanni Bellini, Madonna, Venice Acad.

36   Carpaccio, Presentation (detail), Venice Acad.

37   Antonello da Messina, Unknown Man, Louvre

38   Fra Bartolommeo, Descent from Cross, Pitti

39   Andrea del Sarto, Madonna of St. Francis, Uffizi

40   Michael Angelo, Athlete, Sistine Chap., Rome

41   Raphael, La Belle Jardinière, Louvre

42   Giulio Romano, Apollo and Muses, Pitti
Page 6
43   Leonardo da Vinci, Mona Lisa, Louvre

44   Luini, Daughter of Herodias, Uffizi

45   Sodoma, Ecstasy of St. Catherine, Sienna

46   Correggio, Marriage of St. Catherine, Louvre

47   Giorgione, Ordeal of Moses, Uffizi

48   Titian, Venus Equipping Cupid, Borghese, Rome

49   Tintoretto, Mercury and Graces, Ducal Pal., Venice

50   Veronese, Venice Enthroned, Ducal Pal., Venice

51   Lotto, Three Ages, Pitti

52   Bronzino, Christ in Limbo, Uffizi

53   Baroccio, Annunciation

54   Annibale Caracci, Entombment of Christ, Louvre

55   Caravaggio, The Card Players, Dresden

56   Poussin, Et in Arcadia Ego, Louvre

57   Claude Lorrain, Flight into Egypt, Dresden

58   Watteau, Gilles, Louvre

59   Boucher, Pastoral, Louvre

60   David, The Sabines, Louvre

61   Ingres, Oedipus and Sphinx, Louvre

62   Delacroix, Massacre of Scio, Louvre

63   Gérôme, Pollice Verso

64   Corot, Landscape

65   Rousseau, Charcoal Burner's Hut, Fuller Collection

66   Millet, The Gleaners, Louvre

67   Cabanel, Phædra
Page 7
68   Meissonier, Napoleon in 1814

69   Sanchez-Coello, Daughter of Philip II., Madrid

70   Murillo, St. Anthony of Padua, Dresden

71   Ribera, St. Agnes, Dresden

72   Fortuny, Spanish Marriage

73   Madrazo, Unmasked

74   Van Eycks, St. Bavon Altar-piece, Berlin

75   Memling (?), St. Lawrence, Nat. Gal., Lon.

76   Massys, Head of Virgin, Antwerp

77   Rubens, Portrait of Young Woman

78   Van Dyck, Portrait of Cornelius van der Geest

79   Teniers the Younger, Prodigal Son, Louvre

80   Alfred Stevens, On the Beach

81   Hals, Portrait of a Lady

82   Rembrandt, Head of a Woman, Nat. Gal., Lon.

83   Ruisdael, Landscape

84   Hobbema, The Water Wheel, Amsterdam Mus.

85   Israels, Alone in the World

86   Mauve, Sheep

87   Lochner, Sts. John, Catharine, Matthew, London

88   Wolgemut, Crucifixion, Munich

89   Dürer, Praying Virgin, Augsburg

90   Holbein, Portrait, Hague Mus.

91   Piloty, Wise and Foolish Virgins

92   Leibl, In Church
Page 8
93   Menzel, A Reader

94   Hogarth, Shortly after Marriage, Nat. Gal., Lon.

95   Reynolds, Countess Spencer and Lord Althorp

96   Gainsborough, Blue Boy

97   Constable, Corn Field, Nat. Gal., Lon.

98   Turner, Fighting Téméraire, Nat. Gal., Lon.

99   Burne-Jones, Flamma Vestalis

100  Leighton, Helen of Troy

101  Watts, Love and Death

102  West, Peter Denying Christ, Hampton Court

103  Gilbert Stuart, Washington, Boston Mus.

104  Hunt, Lute Player

105  Eastman Johnson, Churning

106  Inness, Landscape

107  Winslow Homer, Undertow

108  Whistler, The White Girl

109  Sargent, "Carnation Lily, Lily Rose"

110  Chase, Alice, Art Institute, Chicago

       *       *       *       *       *




GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY.


(This includes the leading accessible works that treat of painting in
general. For works on special periods or schools, see the
bibliographical references at the head of each chapter. For
bibliography of individual painters consult, under proper names,
Champlin and Perkins's _Cyclopedia_, as given below.)
Page 9

Champlin and Perkins, _Cyclopedia of Painters and Paintings_, New York.

Adeline, _Lexique des Termes d'Art_.

_Gazette des Beaux Arts_, Paris.

Larousse, _Grand Dictionnaire Universel_, Paris.

_L'Art, Revue hebdomadaire illustrée_, Paris.

Bryan, _Dictionary of Painters_. _New edition_.

Brockhaus, _Conversations-Lexikon_.

Meyer, _Allgemeines Künstler-Lexikon_, Berlin.

Muther, _History of Modern Painting_.

Agincourt, _History of Art by its Monuments_.

Bayet, _Précis d'Histoire de l'Art_.

Blanc, _Histoire des Peintres de toutes les Écoles_.

Eastlake, _Materials for a History of Oil Painting_.

Lübke, _History of Art, trans. by Clarence Cook_.

Reber, _History of Ancient Art_.

Reber, _History of Mediæval Art_.

Schnasse, _Geschichte der Bildenden Künste_.

Girard, _La Peinture Antique_.

Viardot, _History of the Painters of all Schools_.

Williamson (Ed.), _Handbooks of Great Masters_.

Woltmann and Woermann, _History of Painting_.

       *       *       *       *       *




HISTORY OF PAINTING.
Page 10



INTRODUCTION.


The origin of painting is unknown. The first important records of this
art are met with in Egypt; but before the Egyptian civilization the
men of the early ages probably used color in ornamentation and
decoration, and they certainly scratched the outlines of men and
animals upon bone and slate. Traces of this rude primitive work still
remain to us on the pottery, weapons, and stone implements of the
cave-dwellers. But while indicating the awakening of intelligence in
early man, they can be reckoned with as art only in a slight
archæological way. They show inclination rather than accomplishment--a
wish to ornament or to represent, with only a crude knowledge of how
to go about it.

The first aim of this primitive painting was undoubtedly
decoration--the using of colored forms for color and form only, as
shown in the pottery designs or cross-hatchings on stone knives or
spear-heads. The second, and perhaps later aim, was by imitating the
shapes and colors of men, animals, and the like, to convey an idea of
the proportions and characters of such things. An outline of a
cave-bear or a mammoth was perhaps the cave-dweller's way of telling
his fellows what monsters he had slain. We may assume that it was
pictorial record, primitive picture-written history. This early method
of conveying an idea is, in intent, substantially the same as the
later hieroglyphic writing and historical painting of the Egyptians.
The difference between them is merely one of development. Thus there
is an indication in the art of Primitive Man of the two great
departments of painting existent to-day.

1. DECORATIVE PAINTING.

2. EXPRESSIVE PAINTING.

Pure Decorative Painting is not usually expressive of ideas other than
those of rhythmical line and harmonious color. It is not our subject.
This volume treats of Expressive Painting; but in dealing with that it
should be borne in mind that Expressive Painting has always a more or
less decorative effect accompanying it, and that must be spoken of
incidentally. We shall presently see the intermingling of both kinds
of painting in the art of ancient Egypt--our first inquiry.




CHAPTER I.
Page 11
EGYPTIAN PAINTING.

     BOOKS RECOMMENDED: Brugsch, _History of Egypt under the
     Pharaohs_; Budge, _Dwellers on the Nile_; Duncker, _History
     of Antiquity; Egypt Exploration Fund Memoirs_; Ely, _Manual
     of Archæology_; Lepsius, _Denkmaler aus Aegypten und
     Aethiopen_; Maspero, _Life in Ancient Egypt and Assyria_;
     Maspero, _Guide du Visiteur au Musée de Boulaq_; Maspero,
     _Egyptian Archæology_; Perrot and Chipiez, _History of Art
     in Ancient Egypt_; Wilkinson, _Manners and Customs of the
     Ancient Egyptians_.


LAND AND PEOPLE: Egypt, as Herodotus has said, is "the gift of the
Nile," one of the latest of the earth's geological formations, and yet
one of the earliest countries to be settled and dominated by man. It
consists now, as in the ancient days, of the valley of the Nile,
bounded on the east by the Arabian mountains and on the west by the
Libyan desert. Well-watered and fertile, it was doubtless at first a
pastoral and agricultural country; then, by its riverine traffic, a
commercial country, and finally, by conquest, a land enriched with the
spoils of warfare.

Its earliest records show a strongly established monarchy. Dynasties
of kings called Pharaohs succeeded one another by birth or conquest.
The king made the laws, judged the people, declared war, and was
monarch supreme. Next to him in rank came the priests, who were not
only in the service of religion but in that of the state, as
counsellors, secretaries, and the like. The common people, with true
Oriental lack of individuality, depending blindly on leaders, were
little more than the servants of the upper classes.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--HUNTING IN THE MARSHES. TOMB OF TI, SACCARAH.
(FROM PERROT AND CHIPIEZ.)]

The Egyptian religion existing in the earliest days was a worship of
the personified elements of nature. Each element had its particular
controlling god, worshipped as such. Later on in Egyptian history the
number of gods was increased, and each city had its trinity of godlike
protectors symbolized by the propylæa of the temples. Future life was
a certainty, provided that the Ka, or spirit, did not fall a prey to
Typhon, the God of Evil, during the long wait in the tomb for the
judgment-day. The belief that the spirit rested in the body until
finally transported to the aaln fields (the Islands of the Blest,
afterward adopted by the Greeks) was one reason for the careful
preservation of the body by mummifying processes. Life itself was not
more important than death. Hence the imposing ceremonies of the
funeral and burial, the elaborate richness of the tomb and its wall
paintings. Perhaps the first Egyptian art arose through religious
Page 12
observance, and certainly the first known to us was sepulchral.

ART MOTIVES: The centre of the Egyptian system was the monarch and his
supposed relatives, the gods. They arrogated to themselves the chief
thought of life, and the aim of the great bulk of the art was to
glorify monarchy or deity. The massive buildings, still standing
to-day in ruins, were built as the dwelling-places of kings or the
sanctuaries of gods. The towers symbolized deity, the sculptures and
paintings recited the functional duties of presiding spirits, or the
Pharaoh's looks and acts. Almost everything about the public buildings
in painting and sculpture was symbolic illustration, picture-written
history--written with a chisel and brush, written large that all might
read. There was no other safe way of preserving record. There were no
books; the papyrus sheet, used extensively, was frail, and the
Egyptians evidently wished their buildings, carvings, and paintings to
last into eternity. So they wrought in and upon stone. The same
hieroglyphic character of their papyrus writings appeared cut and
colored on the palace walls, and above them and beside them the
pictures ran as vignettes explanatory of the text. In a less
ostentatious way the tombs perpetuated history in a similar manner,
reciting the domestic scenes from the life of the individual, as the
temples and palaces the religious and monarchical scenes.

In one form or another it was all record of Egyptian life, but this
was not the only motive of their painting. The temples and palaces,
designed to shut out light and heat, were long squares of heavy stone,
gloomy as the cave from which their plan may have originated. Carving
and color were used to brighten and enliven the interior. The battles,
the judgment scenes, the Pharaoh playing at draughts with his wives,
the religious rites and ceremonies, were all given with brilliant
arbitrary color, surrounded oftentimes by bordering bands of green,
yellow, and blue. Color showed everywhere from floor to ceiling. Even
the explanatory hieroglyphic texts ran in colors, lining the walls and
winding around the cylinders of stone. The lotus capitals, the frieze
and architrave, all glowed with bright hues, and often the roof
ceiling was painted in blue and studded with golden stars.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--PORTRAIT OF QUEEN TAIA. (FROM PERROT AND
CHIPIEZ.)]

All this shows a decorative motive in Egyptian painting, and how
constantly this was kept in view may be seen at times in the
arrangement of the different scenes, the large ones being placed in
the middle of the wall and the smaller ones going at the top and
bottom, to act as a frieze and dado. There were, then, two leading
motives for Egyptian painting; (1) History, monarchical, religious, or
domestic; and (2) Decoration.

TECHNICAL METHODS: Man in the early stages of civilization comprehends
Page 13
objects more by line than by color or light. The figure is not
studied in itself, but in its sun-shadow or silhouette. The Egyptian
hieroglyph represented objects by outlines or arbitrary marks and
conveyed a simple meaning without circumlocution. The Egyptian
painting was substantially an enlargement of the hieroglyph. There was
no attempt to place objects in the setting which they hold in nature.
Perspective and light-and-shade were disregarded. Objects, of whatever
nature, were shown in flat profile. In the human figure the shoulders
were square, the hips slight, the legs and arms long, the feet and
hands flat. The head, legs, and arms were shown in profile, while the
chest and eye were twisted to show the flat front view. There are only
one or two full-faced figures among the remains of Egyptian painting.
After the outline was drawn the enclosed space was filled in with
plain color. In the absence of high light, or composed groups,
prominence was given to an important figure, like that of the king, by
making it much larger than the other figures. This may be seen in any
of the battle-pieces of Rameses II., in which the monarch in his
chariot is a giant where his followers are mere pygmies. In the
absence of perspective, receding figures of men or of horses were
given by multiplied outlines of legs, or heads, placed before, or
after, or raised above one another. Flat water was represented by
zigzag lines, placed as it were upon a map, one tree symbolized a
forest, and one fortification a town.

These outline drawings were not realistic in any exact sense. The face
was generally expressionless, the figure, evidently done from memory
or pattern, did not reveal anatomical structure, but was nevertheless
graceful, and in the representation of animals the sense of motion was
often given with much truth. The color was usually an attempt at
nature, though at times arbitrary or symbolic, as in the case of
certain gods rendered with blue, yellow, or green skins. The
backgrounds were always of flat color, arbitrary in hue, and
decorative only. The only composition was a balance by numbers, and
the processional scenes rose tier upon tier above one another in long
panels.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--OFFERINGS TO THE DEAD, WALL PAINTING, EIGHTEENTH
DYNASTY. (FROM PERROT AND CHIPIEZ.)]

Such work would seem almost ludicrous did we not keep in mind its
reason for existence. It was, first, symbolic story-telling art, and
secondly, architectural decoration. As a story-teller it was effective
because of its simplicity and directness. As decoration, the repeated
expressionless face and figure, the arbitrary color, the absence of
perspective were not inappropriate then nor are they now. Egyptian
painting never was free from the decorative motive. Wall painting was
little more than an adjunct of architecture, and probably grew out of
sculpture. The early statues were colored, and on the wall the chisel,
like the flint of Primitive Man, cut the outline of the figure. At
Page 14
first only this cut was filled with color, producing what has been
called the koil-anaglyphic. In the final stage the line was made by
drawing with chalk or coal on prepared stucco, and the color, mixed
with gum-water (a kind of distemper), was applied to the whole
enclosed space. Substantially the same method of painting was used
upon other materials, such as wood, mummy cartonnage, papyrus; and in
all its thousands of years of existence Egyptian painting never
advanced upon or varied to any extent this one method of work.

HISTORIC PERIODS: Egyptian art may be traced back as far as the Third
or Fourth Memphitic dynasty of kings. The date is uncertain, but it is
somewhere near 3,500 B.C. The seat of empire, at that time, was
located at Memphis in Lower Egypt, and it is among the remains of this

Memphitic Period that the earliest and best painting is found. In
fact, all Egyptian art, literature, language, civilization, seem at
their highest point of perfection in the period farthest removed from
us. In that earliest age the finest portrait busts were cut, and the
painting, found chiefly in the tombs and on the mummy-cases, was the
attempted realistic with not a little of spirited individuality. The
figure was rather short and squat, the face a little squarer than the
conventional type afterward adopted, the action better, and the
positions, attitudes, and gestures more truthful to local
characteristics. The domestic scenes--hunting, fishing, tilling,
grazing--were all shown in the one flat, planeless, shadowless method
of representation, but with better drawing and color and more variety
than appeared later on. Still, more or less conventional types were
used, even in this early time, and continued to be used all through
Egyptian history.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--VIGNETTE ON PAPYRUS, LOUVRE. (FROM PERROT AND
CHIPIEZ.)]

The Memphitic Period comes down to the eleventh dynasty. In the
fifteenth dynasty comes the invasion of the so-called Hyksos, or
Shepherd Kings. Little is known of the Hyksos, and, in painting, the
next stage is the

Theban Period, which, culminated in Thebes, in Upper Egypt, with
Rameses II., of the nineteenth dynasty. Painting had then changed
somewhat both in subject and character. The time was one of great
temple and palace building, and, though the painting of _genre_
subjects in tombs and sepulchres continued, the general body of art
became more monumental and subservient to architecture. Painting was
put to work on temple and palace-walls, depicting processional scenes,
either religious or monarchical, and vast in extent. The figure, too,
changed slightly. It became longer, slighter, with a pronounced nose,
thick lips, and long eye. From constant repetition, rather than any
set rule or canon, this figure grew conventional, and was reproduced
Page 15
as a type in a mechanical and unvarying manner for hundreds of years.
It was, in fact, only a variation from the original Egyptian type seen
in the tombs of the earliest dynasties. There was a great quantity of
art produced during the Theban Period, and of a graceful, decorative
character, but it was rather monotonous by repetition and filled with
established mannerisms. The Egyptian really never was a free worker,
never an artist expressing himself; but, for his day, a skilled
mechanic following time-honored example. In the

Saitic Period the seat of empire was once more in Lower Egypt, and art
had visibly declined with the waning power of the country. All
spontaneity seemed to have passed out of it, it was repetition of
repetition by poor workmen, and the simplicity and purity of the
technic were corrupted by foreign influences. With the Alexandrian
epoch Egyptian art came in contact with Greek methods, and grew
imitative of the new art, to the detriment of its own native
character. Eventually it was entirely lost in the art of the
Greco-Roman world. It was never other than conventional, produced by a
method almost as unvarying as that of the hieroglyphic writing, and in
this very respect characteristic and reflective of the unchanging
Orientals. Technically it had its shortcomings, but it conveyed the
proper information to its beholders and was serviceable and graceful
decoration for Egyptian days.

     EXTANT PAINTINGS: The temples, palaces, and tombs of Egypt
     still reveal Egyptian painting in almost as perfect a state
     as when originally executed; the Ghizeh Museum has many fine
     examples; and there are numerous examples in the museums at
     Turin, Paris, Berlin, London, New York, and Boston. An
     interesting collection belongs to the New York Historical
     Society, and some of the latest "finds" of the Egypt
     Exploration Fund are in the Boston Museum.




CHAPTER II.

CHALDÆO-ASSYRIAN PAINTING.

     BOOKS RECOMMENDED: Babelon, _Manual of Oriental
     Antiquities_; Botta, _Monument de Ninive_; Budge,
     _Babylonian Life and History_; Duncker, _History of
     Antiquity_; Layard, _Nineveh and its Remains_; Layard,
     _Discoveries Among Ruins of Nineveh and Babylon_; Lenormant,
     _Manual of the Ancient History of the East_; Loftus,
     _Travels in Chaldæa and Susiana_; Maspero, _Life in Ancient
     Egypt and Assyria_; Perrot and Chipiez, _History of Art in
     Chaldæa and Assyria_; Place, _Ninive et l'Assyrie_; Sayce,
Page 16
     _Assyria: Its Palaces, Priests, and People_.


TIGRIS-EUPHRATES CIVILIZATION: In many respects the civilization along
the Tigris-Euphrates was like that along the Nile. Both valleys were
settled by primitive peoples, who grew rapidly by virtue of favorable
climate and soil, and eventually developed into great nations headed
by kings absolute in power. The king was the state in Egypt, and in
Assyria the monarch was even more dominant and absolute. For the
Pharaohs shared architecture, painting, and sculpture with the gods;
but the Sargonids seem to have arrogated the most of these things to
themselves alone.

Religion was perhaps as real in Assyria as in Egypt, but it was less
apparent in art. Certain genii, called gods or demons, appear in the
bas-reliefs, but it is not yet settled whether they represent gods or
merely legendary heroes or monsters of fable. There was no great
demonstration of religion by form and color, as in Egypt. The
Assyrians were Semites, and religion with them was more a matter of
the spirit than the senses--an image in the mind rather than an image
in metal or stone. The temple was not eloquent with the actions and
deeds of the gods, and even the tomb, that fruitful source of art in
Egypt, was in Chaldæa undecorated and in Assyria unknown. No one knows
what the Assyrians did with their dead, unless they carried them back
to the fatherland of the race, the Persian Gulf region, as the native
tribes of Mesopotamia do to this day.

ART MOTIVES: As in Egypt, there were two motives for art--illustration
and decoration. Religion, as we have seen, hardly obtained at all. The
king attracted the greatest attention. The countless bas-reliefs, cut
on soft stone slabs, were pages from the history of the monarch in
peace and war, in council, in the chase, or in processional rites.
Beside him and around him his officers came in for a share of the
background glory. Occasionally the common people had representations
of their lives and their pursuits, but the main subject of all the
valley art was the king and his doings. Sculpture and painting were
largely illustrations accompanying a history written in the
ever-present cuneiform characters.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--ENAMELLED BRICK. NIMROUD. (FROM PERROT AND
CHIPIEZ.)]

But, while serving as history, like the picture-writings of the
Egyptians, this illustration was likewise decoration, and was designed
with that end in view. Rows upon rows of partly colored bas-reliefs
were arranged like a dado along the palace-wall, and above them
wall-paintings, or glazed tiles in patterns, carried out the color
scheme. Almost all of the color has now disappeared, but it must have
been brilliant at one time, and was doubtless in harmony with the
Page 17
architecture. Both painting and sculpture were subordinate to and
dependent upon architecture. Palace-building was the chief pursuit,
and the other arts were called in mainly as adjuncts--ornamental
records of the king who built.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--ENAMELLED BRICK. KHORSABAD. (FROM PERROT AND
CHIPIEZ.)]

THE TYPE, FORM, COLOR: There were only two distinct faces in Assyrian
art--one with and one without a beard. Neither of them was a portrait
except as attributes or inscriptions designated. The type was
unendingly repeated. Women appeared in only one or two isolated cases,
and even these are doubtful. The warrior, a strong, coarse-membered,
heavily muscled creation, with a heavy, expressionless, Semitic face,
appeared everywhere. The figure was placed in profile, with eye and
bust twisted to show the front view, and the long feet projected one
beyond the other, as in the Nile pictures. This was the Assyrian ideal
of strength, dignity, and majesty, established probably in the early
ages, and repeated for centuries with few characteristic variations.
The figure was usually given in motion, walking, or riding, and had
little of that grace seen in Egyptian painting, but in its place a
great deal of rude strength. In modelling, the human form was not so
knowingly rendered as the animal. The long Eastern clothing probably
prevented the close study of the figure. This failure in anatomical
exactness was balanced in part by minute details in the dress and
accessories, productive of a rich ornamental effect.

Hard stone was not found in the Mesopotamian regions. Temples were
built of burnt brick, bas-reliefs were made upon alabaster slabs and
heightened by coloring, and painting was largely upon tiles, with
mineral paints, afterward glazed by fire. These glazed brick or tiles,
with figured designs, were fixed upon the walls, arches, and
archivolts by bitumen mortar, and made up the first mosaics of which
we have record. There was a further painting upon plaster in
distemper, of which some few traces remain. It did not differ in
design from the bas-reliefs or the tile mosaics.

The subjects used were the Assyrian type, shown somewhat slighter in
painting than in sculpture, animals, birds, and other objects; but
they were obviously not attempts at nature. The color was arbitrary,
not natural, and there was little perspective, light-and-shade, or
relief. Heavy outline bands of color appeared about the object, and
the prevailing hues were yellow and blue. There was perhaps less
symbolism and more direct representation in Assyria than in Egypt.
There was also more feeling for perspective and space, as shown in
such objects as water and in the mountain landscapes of the late
bas-reliefs; but, in the main, there was no advance upon Egypt. There
was a difference which was not necessarily a development. Painting, as
we know the art to-day, was not practised in Chaldæa-Assyria. It was
Page 18
never free from a servitude to architecture and sculpture; it was
hampered by conventionalities; and the painter was more artisan than
artist, having little freedom or individuality.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--WILD ASS. BAS-RELIEF, BRITISH MUSEUM. (FROM
PERROT AND CHIPIEZ.)]

HISTORIC PERIODS: Chaldæa, of unknown antiquity, with Babylon its
capital, is accounted the oldest nation in the Tigris-Euphrates
valley, and, so far as is known, it was an original nation producing
an original art. Its sculpture (especially in the Tello heads), and
presumably its painting, were more realistic and individual than any
other in the valley. Assyria coming later, and the heir of Chaldæa,
was the

Second Empire: There are two distinct periods of this Second Empire, the
first lasting from 1,400 B.C., down to about 900 B.C., and in art
showing a great profusion of bas-reliefs. The second closed about 625
B.C., and in art produced much glazed-tile work and a more elaborate
sculpture and painting. After this the Chaldæan provinces gained the
ascendency again, and Babylon, under Nebuchadnezzar, became the first
city of Asia. But the new Babylon did not last long. It fell before
Cyrus and the Persians 536 B.C. Again, as in Egypt, the earliest art
appears the purest and the simplest, and the years of Chaldæo-Assyrian
history known to us carry a record of change rather than of progress in
art.

     ART REMAINS: The most valuable collections of
     Chaldæo-Assyrian art are to be found in the Louvre and the
     British Museum. The other large museums of Europe have
     collections in this department, but all of them combined are
     little compared with the treasures that still lie buried in
     the mounds of the Tigris-Euphrates valley. Excavations have
     been made at Mugheir, Warka, Khorsabad, Kouyunjik, and
     elsewhere, but many difficulties have thus far rendered
     systematic work impossible. The complete history of
     Chaldæo-Assyria and its art has yet to be written.


PERSIAN PAINTING.

     BOOKS RECOMMENDED: As before cited, Babelon, Duncker,
     Lenormant, Ely; Dieulafoy, _L'Art Antique de la Perse_;
     Flandin et Coste, _Voyage en Perse_; Justi, _Geschichte des
     alten Persiens_; Perrot and Chipiez, _History of Art in
     Persia_.


HISTORY AND ART MOTIVES: The Medes and Persians were the natural
Page 19
inheritors of Assyrian civilization, but they did not improve their
birthright. The Medes soon lost their power. Cyrus conquered them, and
established the powerful Persian monarchy upheld for two hundred years
by Cambyses, Darius, and Xerxes. Substantially the same conditions
surrounded the Persians as the Assyrians--that is, so far as art
production was concerned. Their conceptions of life were similar, and
their use of art was for historic illustration of kingly doings and
ornamental embellishment of kingly palaces. Both sculpture and
painting were accessories of architecture.

Of Median art nothing remains. The Persians left the record, but it
was not wholly of their own invention, nor was it very extensive or
brilliant. It had little originality about it, and was really only an
echo of Assyria. The sculptors and painters copied their Assyrian
predecessors, repeating at Persepolis what had been better told at
Nineveh.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--LIONS' FRIEZE, SUSA. (FROM PERROT AND CHIPIEZ.)]

TYPES AND TECHNIC: The same subjects, types, and technical methods in
bas-relief, tile, and painting on plaster were followed under Darius
as under Shalmanezer. But the imitation was not so good as the
original. The warrior, the winged monsters, the animals all lost
something of their air of brutal defiance and their strength of
modelling. Heroes still walked in procession along the bas-reliefs and
glazed tiles, but the figure was smaller, more effeminate, the hair
and beard were not so long, the drapery fell in slightly indicated
folds at times, and there was a profusion of ornamental detail. Some
of this detail and some modifications in the figure showed the
influence of foreign nations other than the Greek; but, in the main,
Persian art followed in the footsteps of Assyrian art. It was the last
reflection of Mesopotamian splendor. For with the conquest of Persia
by Alexander the book of expressive art in that valley was closed,
and, under Islam, it remains closed to this day.

     ART REMAINS: Persian painting is something about which
     little is known because little remains. The Louvre contains
     some reconstructed friezes made in mosaics of stamped brick
     and square tile, showing figures of lions and a number of
     archers. The coloring is particularly rich, and may give
     some idea of Persian pigments. Aside from the chief museums
     of Europe the bulk of Persian art is still seen half-buried
     in the ruins of Persepolis and elsewhere.


PHOENICIAN, CYPRIOTE, AND ASIA MINOR PAINTING.

     BOOKS RECOMMENDED: As before cited, Babelon, Duncker, Ely,
     Girard, Lenormant; Cesnola, _Cyprus_; Cesnola, _Cypriote
Page 20
